[DOC] Add new documentation for distributed tracing (#4964)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _observing-your-data/trace/distributed-tracing.md

---
layout: default
title: Distrbuted tracing 
parent: Trace Analytics
nav_order: 65
---

# Distributed tracing
This is an experimental feature and is not recommended for use in a production environment. For updates on the progress of the feature or if you want to leave feedback, see the associated [GitHub issue](<insertlink>) or the [project board](insert-link).    
{: .warning}

Distributed tracing is used to monitor and debug distributed systems. You can track the flow of requests through a system and identify performance bottlenecks and errors. A _trace_ is a complete end-to-end path of a request as it flow through a distributed systems. It represents the journey of a specific operation as it traverses various components and services in a distributed architecture. In distributed tracing, a single trace contains a series of tagged time intervals called _spans_. Spans have a start and end time, and may include other metadata like logs or tags to help classify what happened. 

Distributed tracing offers several benefits, including:

- **Performance optimization:** Identify and resolve bottlenecks, reducing latency in your applications.

> - **Debugging:** Quickly pinpoint the source of errors or unexpected behavior in your distributed system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Troubleshooting:** Quickly pinpoint the source of errors or unexpected behavior in your distributed system.
```

- **Resource allocation:** Optimize resource allocation by understanding usage patterns of different services.
- **Service dependencies:** Visualize dependencies between services, helping you to manage architectures. 

## Distributed tracing pipeline

> OpenSearch provides a distributed tracing pipeline that can be used to ingest, process, and visualize tracing data with query and alerting. OpenTelemtry is an open-source observability framework that provides a set of APIs, libraries, agents, and collectors for generating, capturing, and exporting telemetry data. The distributed tracing pipeline consists of the following components: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenSearch provides a distributed tracing pipeline that can be used to ingest, process, and visualize tracing data with query and alerting. [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) is an open-source observability framework that provides a set of APIs, libraries, agents, and collectors for generating, capturing, and exporting telemetry data. The distributed tracing pipeline consists of the following components: 
```

> - **Creation:** Instrumenting your application code with OpenTelemetry SDKs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Instrumentation:** Instrumenting your application code with OpenTelemetry SDKs.
```

- **Propagation:** Injecting trace context into requests as they propagate through your system.

> - **Collection:** Collecting trace data from your application and sending it to a backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Collection:** Collecting trace data from your application and sending it to a tracing storage backend.
```

- **Processing:** Aggregating trace data from multiple sources and enriching it with additional metadata.
- **Exporting:** Sending trace data to a backend for storage and analysis. 

> OpenSearch serves as the sink for traces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenSearch is often chosen as the sink for traces.
```

## Trace analytics

OpenSearch provides a `trace-analytics` plugin for visualizing trace data in real time. The plugin includes pre-built dashboards for analyzing trace data, such as service maps, latency histograms, and error rates. With OpenSearch's distributed tracing pipeline, you can quickly identify bottlenecks and errors in your applications. See the [Trace analytics]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/trace/index/) documentation for more information. 

## Get started

> The distributed tracing feature is experimental as of OpenSearch 2.11. To begin using the distributed tracing feature, you need to first enable it using `opensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled` feature flag, and subsequently activate the tracer, using the dynamic setting `telemetry.tracer.enabled`. It's important to exercise caution when enabling this feature, as it can consume system resources. Detailed information on enabling and configuring distributed tracing, including on-demand debugging and request sampling, is described in the following sections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The distributed tracing feature is experimental as of OpenSearch 2.10. To begin using the distributed tracing feature, you need to first enable it using `opensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled` feature flag, and subsequently activate the tracer, using the dynamic setting `telemetry.tracer.enabled`. It's important to exercise caution when enabling this feature, as it can consume system resources. Detailed information on enabling and configuring distributed tracing, including on-demand debugging and request sampling, is described in the following sections.
```

### Enable on a node using a tarball install

The flag is toggled using a new Java Virtual Machine (JVM) parameter that is set either in `OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS` or in `config/jvm.options`.

> 

Reviewer 2: #### Option 1: Enable the experimental feature flag in opensearch.yml
cd to your local distribution build for OpenSearch.
cd into the OpenSearch config folder, open opensearch.yml in your local editor and add the following line at the end.
```
opensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true

```

Author: Done

> #### Option 1: Modify jvm.options

Reviewer 2: #### Option 2: Modify jvm.options

Add the following lines to `config/jvm.options` before starting the OpenSearch process to enable the feature and its dependency:

```bash
-Dopensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true

Run OpenSearch

./bin/opensearch
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> #### Option 2: Enable from an environment variable

Reviewer 2: #### Option 3: Enable from an environment variable

```bash
export OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS="-Dopensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true"
 ./bin/opensearch
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Enable with Docker containers

If you’re running Docker, add the following line to `docker-compose.yml` underneath the `opensearch-node` and environment section:

```bash
OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS="-Dopensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true"
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Enable for OpenSearch development

To enable the distributed feature, you must first enable these features by adding the correct properties to `run.gradle` before building OpenSearch. See the [Developer Guide](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/main/DEVELOPER_GUIDE.md#gradle-build) for information about to use how Gradle to build OpenSearch.

Add the following properties to `run.gradle` to enable the feature:

```bash
testClusters {
  runTask {
    testDistribution = 'archive'
 if (numZones > 1) numberOfZones = numZones
    if (numNodes > 1) numberOfNodes = numNodes
    systemProperty 'opensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled', 'true'
 }
 }
 ```
 {% include copy-curl.html %}

### Enable distributed tracing

> Once you've enabled the feature flag, you can enable the tracer using the following dynamic setting. This setting can be adjusted dynamically to enable or disable tracing in the running cluster:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you've enabled the feature flag, you can enable the tracer (which is disabled by default) using the following dynamic setting. This setting can be adjusted dynamically to enable or disable tracing in the running cluster:
```

```bash
telemetry.tracer.enabled=true
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

## Install the OpenSearch OpenTelemetry plugin

OpenSearch's distributed tracing framework aims to support various telemetry solutions through plugins. The OpenSearch OpenTelemetry plugin `telemetry-otel` is available and must be installed to enable tracing. The following guide provides you with the installation instructions.

### Exporters

> The distributed tracing feature generates traces and spans for HTTP requests only. These traces and spans are initially kept in memory using the OpenTelemetry `BatchSpanProcessor` and then are sent to an exporter based on configured settings. The following are the key components:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the moment, the distributed tracing feature generates traces and spans for HTTP requests and subset of transport requests. These traces and spans are initially kept in memory using the OpenTelemetry `BatchSpanProcessor` and then are sent to an exporter based on configured settings. The following are the key components:
```

1. **Span processors:** As spans conclude on the request path, OpenTelemetry provides them to the `SpanProcessor` for processing and exporting. OpenSearch's distributed tracing framework uses the `BatchSpanProcessor`, which batches spans for specific configurable intervals and then sends them to the exporter. The following configurations are available for the `BatchSpanProcessor`:
    - `telemetry.otel.tracer.exporter.max_queue_size`: Defines the maximum queue size. When the queue reaches this value, it will be written to the exporter. Default is `2048`. 
    - `telemetry.otel.tracer.exporter.delay`: Defines the delay. If there are not enough spans to fill the `max_queue_size` until this delay time, they will be flushed. Default is `2 seconds`.
    - `telemetry.otel.tracer.exporter.batch_size`: Configures the maximum batch size for each export to reduce input/output. This value should always be less than the `max_queue_size`. Default is `512`.
2. **Exporters:** Exporters are responsible for persisting the data. OpenTelemetry provides several out-of-the-box exporters, and OpenSearch supports the following:

>     - `LoggingSpanExporter`: Exports spans to a log file, generating a separate file in the logs directory `_otel_traces.log`. Default is `telemetry.otel.tracer.span.exporter.class=io.opentelemetry.exporter.logging.LoggingSpanExporter`.

Reviewer 2: - `OtlpGrpcSpanExporter`: Export spans via gRPC. To use this exporter, you need to install the otel-collector on the node. By default, it writes to the http://localhost:4317/ endpoint. It can be configured via a static setting. `telemetry.otel.tracer.span.exporter.class=org.opensearch.telemetry.tracing.exporter.OtlpGrpcSpanExporterProvider`

Author: Done

>     - `LoggingSpanExporter`: Exports spans to a log file, generating a separate file in the logs directory `_otel_traces.log`. Default is `telemetry.otel.tracer.span.exporter.class=io.opentelemetry.exporter.logging.LoggingSpanExporter`.

Reviewer 2: - `LoggingSpanExporter`: Export spans to a log file, generating a separate file in the logs directory `_otel_traces.log`. Default is `telemetry.otel.tracer.span.exporter.class=io.opentelemetry.exporter.logging.LoggingSpanExporter`.

### Sampling

> Distributed tracing can generate numerous spans, consuming system resources unnecessarily. To reduce the number of traces, also called samples, you can enable sampling. Sampling is configured by default for only 1% of all HTTP requests. Sampling has the following types:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Distributed tracing can generate numerous spans, consuming system resources unnecessarily. To reduce the number of traces, also called samples, you can configure different sampling thresholds. Sampling is configured by default for only 1% of all HTTP requests. Sampling has the following types:
```

1. **Head sampling:** Sampling decisions are made before initiating the root span of a request. OpenSearch supports two head sampling methods:
    - **Probabilistic:** A blanket limit on incoming requests, dynamically adjustable with the `telemetry.tracer.sampler.probability` setting. This setting ranges between 0 and 1. Default is 0.01, which indicates that 1% of incoming requests are sampled.

>     - **On-Demand:** For debugging specific requests, users can send the `trace=true` attribute as part of the header, causing those requests to be sampled regardless of the probabilistic sampling setting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **On-Demand:** For debugging specific requests, users can send the `trace=true` attribute as part of the HTTP headers, causing those requests to be sampled regardless of the probabilistic sampling setting.
```

- **Creation:** Instrumenting your application code with OpenTelemetry SDKs.
- **Propagation:** Injecting trace context into requests as they propagate through your system.
- **Collection:** Collecting trace data from your application and sending it to a backend.
- **Processing:** Aggregating trace data from multiple sources and enriching it with additional metadata.
- **Exporting:** Sending trace data to a backend for storage and analysis. 

OpenSearch serves as the sink for traces.

## Trace analytics

OpenSearch provides a `trace-analytics` plugin for visualizing trace data in real time. The plugin includes pre-built dashboards for analyzing trace data, such as service maps, latency histograms, and error rates. With OpenSearch's distributed tracing pipeline, you can quickly identify bottlenecks and errors in your applications. See the [Trace analytics]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/trace/index/) documentation for more information. 

## Get started

> The distributed tracing feature is experimental as of OpenSearch 2.10. To begin using the distributed tracing feature, you need to first enable it, and subsequently activate the tracer, using the dynamic setting `telemetry.tracer.enabled`. It's important to exercise caution when enabling this feature, as it can consume system resources. Detailed information on enabling and configuring distributed tracing, including on-demand debugging and request sampling, is described in the following sections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The distributed tracing feature is experimental as of OpenSearch 2.10. To begin using the distributed tracing feature, you need to first enable it using `opensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled` feature flag, and subsequently activate the tracer, using the dynamic setting `telemetry.tracer.enabled`. It's important to exercise caution when enabling this feature, as it can consume system resources. Detailed information on enabling and configuring distributed tracing, including on-demand debugging and request sampling, is described in the following sections.
```

```bash
OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS="-Dopensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true"
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Enable for OpenSearch development

To enable the distributed feature, you must first enable these features by adding the correct properties to `run.gradle` before building OpenSearch. See the [Developer Guide](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/main/DEVELOPER_GUIDE.md#gradle-build) for information about to use how Gradle to build OpenSearch.

Add the following properties to `run.gradle` to enable the feature:

```bash
testClusters {
  runTask {
    testDistribution = 'archive'
 if (numZones > 1) numberOfZones = numZones
    if (numNodes > 1) numberOfNodes = numNodes
    systemProperty 'opensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled', 'true'
 }
 }
 ```
 {% include copy-curl.html %}

### Enable distributed tracing

Once you've enabled the feature flag, you can enable the tracer using the following dynamic setting. This setting can be adjusted dynamically to enable or disable tracing in the running cluster:

```bash
telemetry.tracer.enabled=true
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

## Install the OpenSearch OpenTelemetry plugin

> OpenSearch's distributed tracing framework supports various telemetry solutions through plugins. The OpenSearch OpenTelemetry plugin `telemetry-otel` is available and must be installed to enable tracing. The following guide provides you with the installation instructions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenSearch's distributed tracing framework aims to support various telemetry solutions through plugins. The OpenSearch OpenTelemetry plugin `telemetry-otel` is available and must be installed to enable tracing. The following guide provides you with the installation instructions.
```

Reviewer: Consider the intent here since we are not there yet (to support other solutions) but that is the eventual goal

### Exporters

> The distributed tracing feature generates traces and spans for requests and other cluster operations. These traces and spans are initially kept in memory using the OpenTelemetry `BatchSpanProcessor` and then are sent to an exporter based on configured settings. The following are the key components:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The distributed tracing feature generates traces and spans for HTTP requests only. These traces and spans are initially kept in memory using the OpenTelemetry `BatchSpanProcessor` and then are sent to an exporter based on configured settings. The following are the key components:
```

    - `telemetry.otel.tracer.exporter.max_queue_size`: Defines the maximum queue size. When the queue reaches this value, it will be written to the exporter. Default is `2048`. 
    - `telemetry.otel.tracer.exporter.delay`: Defines the delay. If there are not enough spans to fill the `max_queue_size` until this delay time, they will be flushed. Default is `2 seconds`.
    - `telemetry.otel.tracer.exporter.batch_size`: Configures the maximum batch size for each export to reduce input/output. This value should always be less than the `max_queue_size`. Default is `512`.
2. **Exporters:** Exporters are responsible for persisting the data. OpenTelemetry provides several out-of-the-box exporters, and OpenSearch currently supports the following:
    - `LoggingSpanExporter`: Exports spans to a log file, generating a separate file in the logs directory `_otel_traces.log`. Default is `telemetry.otel.tracer.span.exporter.class=io.opentelemetry.exporter.logging.LoggingSpanExporter`.

>     - `OtlpGrpcSpanExporter`: Exports spans by using [gRPC](https://grpc.io/). To use this exporter, you need to install the `otel-collector` on the node and specify the endpoint using the setting `telemetry.otel.tracer.exporter.endpoint`. By default, it writes to the endpoint `http://localhost:4317/`. If you want to configure it for HTTPS, follow the guidance in the [OpenTelemetry Configuration](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/) documentation. The setting is as follows:

Reviewer: I think this one is not yet on 2.10, the pull request is not ready

Reviewer 2: Support for OtlpGrpcSpanExporter is not there in 2.10, we need to remove this section,

Author: For visibility, draft text for future updates: `OtlpGrpcSpanExporter`: Exports spans by using [gRPC](https://grpc.io/). To use this exporter, you need to install the `otel-collector` on the node and specify the endpoint using the setting `telemetry.otel.tracer.exporter.endpoint`. By default, it writes to the endpoint `http://localhost:4317/`. If you want to configure it for HTTPS, follow the guidance in the [OpenTelemetry Configuration](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/) documentation. The setting is as follows:
        - `telemetry.otel.tracer.span.exporter.class=org.opensearch.telemetry.tracing.exporter.OtlpGrpcSpanExporterProvider`
        - `telemetry.otel.tracer.exporter.endpoint: https://localhost:4317`

>         - `telemetry.otel.tracer.span.exporter.class=org.opensearch.telemetry.tracing.exporter.OtlpGrpcSpanExporterProvider`

Reviewer: Also not there yet, the pull request is not ready

Reviewer 2: Yes, Only support for LoggingSpanExporter is there as of 2.10.

Author: We can update these parameters when they're available.

        - `telemetry.otel.tracer.exporter.endpoint: https://localhost:4317`

### Sampling

> Distributed tracing can generate numerous spans, consuming system resources unnecessarily. To reduce the number of traces, also called samples, you can enable sampling. Sampling is configured by default for only 1% of all requests. Sampling has the following types:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Distributed tracing can generate numerous spans, consuming system resources unnecessarily. To reduce the number of traces, also called samples, you can enable sampling. Sampling is configured by default for only 1% of all HTTP requests. Sampling has the following types:
```

---
layout: default
title: Distrbuted tracing 
parent: Trace Analytics
nav_order: 65
---

# Distributed tracing
This is an experimental feature and is not recommended for use in a production environment. For updates on the progress of the feature or if you want to leave feedback, see the associated [GitHub issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/6750).    
{: .warning}

> Distributed tracing is used to monitor and debug distributed systems. You can track the flow of requests through a system and identify performance bottlenecks and errors. A _trace_ is a complete end-to-end path of a request as it flow through a distributed systems. It represents the journey of a specific operation as it traverses various components and services in a distributed architecture. In distributed tracing, a single trace contains a series of tagged time intervals called _spans_. Spans have a start and end time, and may include other metadata like logs or tags to help classify what happened. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Distributed tracing is used to monitor and debug distributed systems. You can track the flow of requests through the system and identify performance bottlenecks and errors. A _trace_ is a complete end-to-end path of a request as it flows through a distributed system. It represents the journey of a specific operation as it traverses various components and services in a distributed architecture. In distributed tracing, a single trace contains a series of tagged time intervals called _spans_. Spans have a start and end time, and may include other metadata like logs or tags to help classify what happened. 
```

> Distributed tracing offers several benefits, including:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use distributed tracing for the following purposes:
```

> - **Performance optimization:** Identify and resolve bottlenecks, reducing latency in your applications.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Optimize performance:** Identify and resolve bottlenecks, reducing latency in your applications.
```

> - **Troubleshooting:** Quickly pinpoint the source of errors or unexpected behavior in your distributed system.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Troubleshoot errors:** Quickly pinpoint the source of errors or unexpected behavior in your distributed system.
```

> - **Resource allocation:** Optimize resource allocation by understanding usage patterns of different services.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Allocate resources:** Optimize resource allocation by understanding usage patterns of different services.
```

> - **Service dependencies:** Visualize dependencies between services, helping you to manage architectures. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Visualize service dependencies:** Visualize dependencies between services, helping you to manage architectures. 
```

## Distributed tracing pipeline

OpenSearch provides a distributed tracing pipeline that can be used to ingest, process, and visualize tracing data with query and alerting functionality. [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) is an open-source observability framework that provides a set of APIs, libraries, agents, and collectors for generating, capturing, and exporting telemetry data. The distributed tracing pipeline consists of the following components: 

- **Instrumentation:** Instrumenting your application code with OpenTelemetry SDKs.
- **Propagation:** Injecting trace context into requests as they propagate through your system.
- **Collection:** Collecting trace data from your application.
- **Processing:** Aggregating trace data from multiple sources and enriching it with additional metadata.
- **Exporting:** Sending trace data to a backend for storage and analysis. 

OpenSearch is often chosen as the sink for storing trace data.

## Trace analytics

> OpenSearch provides a `trace-analytics` plugin for visualizing trace data in real time. The plugin includes pre-built dashboards for analyzing trace data, such as service maps, latency histograms, and error rates. With OpenSearch's distributed tracing pipeline, you can quickly identify bottlenecks and errors in your applications. See the [Trace analytics]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/trace/index/) documentation for more information. 

Reviewer 3: With *the* OpenSearch distributed tracing pipeline?

## Get started

The distributed tracing feature is experimental as of OpenSearch 2.10. To begin using the distributed tracing feature, you need to first enable it using `opensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled` feature flag, and subsequently activate the tracer, using the dynamic setting `telemetry.tracer.enabled`. It's important to exercise caution when enabling this feature, as it can consume system resources. Detailed information on enabling and configuring distributed tracing, including on-demand troubleshooting and request sampling, is described in the following sections.

### Enable on a node using a tarball install

The flag is toggled using a new Java Virtual Machine (JVM) parameter that is set either in `OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS` or in `config/jvm.options`.

#### Option 1: Enable the experimental feature flag in the `opensearch.yml` file

1. Change to the top directory of your OpenSearch installation.

```bash
cd \path\to\opensearch
```

2. Open your OpenSearch configuration folder, then open the `opensearch.yml` file with a text editor.
3. Add the following line:

```bash
opensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true
```

> {% include copy-curl.html %}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{% include copy.html %}
```

4. Save your changes and close the file.

#### Option 2: Modify jvm.options

Add the following lines to `config/jvm.options` before starting the OpenSearch process to enable the feature and its dependency:

```bash
-Dopensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true

> 

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
```
{% include copy.html %}

````

Run OpenSearch

> 

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion

```bash
````

./bin/opensearch
```

> {% include copy-curl.html %}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{% include copy.html %}
```

#### Option 3: Enable from an environment variable

As an alternative to directly modifying `config/jvm.options`, you can define the properties by using an environment variable. This can be done in a single command when you start OpenSearch or by defining the variable with export.

To add these flags inline when starting OpenSearch, run the following command:

```bash
OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS="-Dopensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true" ./opensearch-2.9.0/bin/opensearch
```

> {% include copy-curl.html %}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{% include copy.html %}
```

To define the environment variable separately, prior to running OpenSearch, run the following command:

```bash
export OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS="-Dopensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true"
 ./bin/opensearch
```

> {% include copy-curl.html %}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{% include copy.html %}
```

### Enable with Docker containers

> If you’re running Docker, add the following line to `docker-compose.yml` underneath the `opensearch-node` and environment section:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you’re running Docker, add the following line to `docker-compose.yml` under the `opensearch-node` and environment section:
```

```bash
OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS="-Dopensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true"
```

> {% include copy-curl.html %}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{% include copy.html %}
```

### Enable for OpenSearch development

> To enable the distributed feature, you must first enable these features by adding the correct properties to `run.gradle` before building OpenSearch. See the [Developer Guide](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/main/DEVELOPER_GUIDE.md#gradle-build) for information about to use how Gradle to build OpenSearch.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To enable the distributed tracing feature, you must first add the correct properties to `run.gradle` before building OpenSearch. See the [Developer Guide](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/main/DEVELOPER_GUIDE.md#gradle-build) for information about to use how Gradle to build OpenSearch.
```

Add the following properties to `run.gradle` to enable the feature:

> ```bash

Reviewer 3: Could you format it nicely (just like the requests in dev tools)?

testClusters {
  runTask {
    testDistribution = 'archive'
 if (numZones > 1) numberOfZones = numZones
    if (numNodes > 1) numberOfNodes = numNodes
    systemProperty 'opensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled', 'true'
 }
 }
 ```

>  {% include copy-curl.html %}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 {% include copy.html %}
```

### Enable distributed tracing

> Once you've enabled the feature flag, you can enable the tracer (which is disabled by default) using the following dynamic setting. This setting can be adjusted dynamically to enable or disable tracing in the running cluster:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once you've enabled the feature flag, you can enable the tracer (which is disabled by default) using the following dynamic setting that enables tracing in the running cluster:
```

```bash
telemetry.tracer.enabled=true
```

> {% include copy-curl.html %}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{% include copy.html %}
```

## Install the OpenSearch OpenTelemetry plugin

> OpenSearch's distributed tracing framework aims to support various telemetry solutions through plugins. The OpenSearch OpenTelemetry plugin `telemetry-otel` is available and must be installed to enable tracing. The following guide provides you with the installation instructions.

Reviewer 3: I would use "The OpenSearch distributed tracing framework" to avoid OpenSearch's throughout

### Exporters

> At the moment, the distributed tracing feature generates traces and spans for HTTP requests and subset of transport requests. These traces and spans are initially kept in memory using the OpenTelemetry `BatchSpanProcessor` and then are sent to an exporter based on configured settings. The following are the key components:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At the moment, the distributed tracing feature generates traces and spans for HTTP requests and a subset of transport requests. These traces and spans are initially kept in memory using the OpenTelemetry `BatchSpanProcessor` and then are sent to an exporter based on configured settings. The following are the key components:
```

1. **Span processors:** As spans conclude on the request path, OpenTelemetry provides them to the `SpanProcessor` for processing and exporting. OpenSearch's distributed tracing framework uses the `BatchSpanProcessor`, which batches spans for specific configurable intervals and then sends them to the exporter. The following configurations are available for the `BatchSpanProcessor`:
    - `telemetry.otel.tracer.exporter.max_queue_size`: Defines the maximum queue size. When the queue reaches this value, it will be written to the exporter. Default is `2048`. 

>     - `telemetry.otel.tracer.exporter.delay`: Defines the delay. If there are not enough spans to fill the `max_queue_size` until this delay time, they will be flushed. Default is `2 seconds`.

Reviewer 3: Please confirm that this is the intended meaning. Also, if you use code font, either use `2` (and add ", in seconds" to the description) or `2s`. Alternatively, just leave it in normal font.
```suggestion
    - `telemetry.otel.tracer.exporter.delay`: Defines the delay---a time period after which spans in the queue will be flushed, even if there are not enough spans to fill the `max_queue_size`. Default is `2 seconds`.
```

    - `telemetry.otel.tracer.exporter.batch_size`: Configures the maximum batch size for each export to reduce input/output. This value should always be less than the `max_queue_size`. Default is `512`.
2. **Exporters:** Exporters are responsible for persisting the data. OpenTelemetry provides several out-of-the-box exporters, and OpenSearch supports the following:
    - `LoggingSpanExporter`: Exports spans to a log file, generating a separate file in the logs directory `_otel_traces.log`. Default is `telemetry.otel.tracer.span.exporter.class=io.opentelemetry.exporter.logging.LoggingSpanExporter`.

>     - `OtlpGrpcSpanExporter`: Exports spans through gRPC. To use this exporter, you need to install the `otel-collector` on the node. By default, it writes to the http://localhost:4317/ endpoint. It can be configured through a static setting: `telemetry.otel.tracer.span.exporter.class=org.opensearch.telemetry.tracing.exporter.OtlpGrpcSpanExporterProvider`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - `OtlpGrpcSpanExporter`: Exports spans through gRPC. To use this exporter, you need to install the `otel-collector` on the node. By default, it writes to the http://localhost:4317/ endpoint. To use this exporter, set the following static setting: `telemetry.otel.tracer.span.exporter.class=org.opensearch.telemetry.tracing.exporter.OtlpGrpcSpanExporterProvider`.
```

>     - `LoggingSpanExporter`: Exports spans to a log file, generating a separate file in the logs directory `_otel_traces.log`. Default is `telemetry.otel.tracer.span.exporter.class=io.opentelemetry.exporter.logging.LoggingSpanExporter`.

Reviewer 3: This is the same as line 144 - remove?

### Sampling

> Distributed tracing can generate numerous spans, consuming system resources unnecessarily. To reduce the number of traces, also called samples, you can configure different sampling thresholds. Sampling is configured by default for only 1% of all HTTP requests. Sampling has the following types:

Reviewer 3: `Sampling is configured by default for only 1% of all HTTP requests.` Does this mean that only 1% of all HTTP requests get traced? If so:
```suggestion
Distributed tracing can generate numerous spans, consuming system resources unnecessarily. To reduce the number of traces, also called samples, you can configure different sampling thresholds. By default, sampling is configured to include only 1% of all HTTP requests. Sampling has the following types:
```

1. **Head sampling:** Sampling decisions are made before initiating the root span of a request. OpenSearch supports two head sampling methods:
    - **Probabilistic:** A blanket limit on incoming requests, dynamically adjustable with the `telemetry.tracer.sampler.probability` setting. This setting ranges between 0 and 1. Default is 0.01, which indicates that 1% of incoming requests are sampled.

>     - **On-Demand:** For debugging specific requests, users can send the `trace=true` attribute as part of the HTTP headers, causing those requests to be sampled regardless of the probabilistic sampling setting.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - **On-Demand:** For debugging specific requests, you can send the `trace=true` attribute as part of the HTTP headers, causing those requests to be sampled regardless of the probabilistic sampling setting.
```

> 2. **Tail base sampling:** To configure tail-based sampling, follow the [OpenTelemetry Sampling](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/sampling/) documentation. Configuration depends on the type of collector you choose. Updates on ongoing work for OpenSearch are in the [RFC](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/8918) on GitHub.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. **Tail sampling:** To configure tail sampling, follow the [OpenTelemetry tail sampling documentation](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/sampling/#tail-sampling). Configuration depends on the type of collector you choose. Updates on ongoing work for OpenSearch are in the [RFC](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/8918) on GitHub.
```

### Collection of spans

> The `SpanProcessor` writes spans to the exporter, and the choice of exporter defines the endpoint, which can be logs or gRPC. To collect spans by using gRPC, you need to configure the collector as a sidecar process running on each OpenSearch node. From the collectors, these spans can be written to the sync of your choice, such as Jaeger, Prometheus, Grafana, and FileStore, for further analysis.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `SpanProcessor` writes spans to the exporter, and the choice of exporter defines the endpoint, which can be logs or gRPC. To collect spans by using gRPC, you need to configure the collector as a sidecar process running on each OpenSearch node. From the collectors, these spans can be written to the sink of your choice, such as Jaeger, Prometheus, Grafana, and FileStore, for further analysis.
```

---
layout: default
title: Distrbuted tracing 
parent: Trace Analytics
nav_order: 65
---

# Distributed tracing
This is an experimental feature and is not recommended for use in a production environment. For updates on the progress of the feature or if you want to leave feedback, see the associated [GitHub issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/6750).    
{: .warning}

> Distributed tracing is used to monitor and debug distributed systems. You can track the flow of requests through the system and identify performance bottlenecks and errors. A _trace_ is a complete end-to-end path of a request as it flows through a distributed system. It represents the journey of a specific operation as it traverses various components and services in a distributed architecture. In distributed tracing, a single trace contains a series of tagged time intervals called _spans_. Spans have a start and end time, and may include other metadata like logs or tags to help classify what happened. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Distributed tracing is used to monitor and debug distributed systems. You can track the flow of requests through the system and identify performance bottlenecks and errors. A _trace_ is a complete end-to-end path of a request as it flows through a distributed system. It represents the journey of a specific operation as it traverses various components and services in a distributed architecture. In distributed tracing, a single trace contains a series of tagged time intervals called _spans_. Spans have a start and end time and may include other metadata like logs or tags to help classify what happened. 
```

Use distributed tracing for the following purposes:

- **Optimize performance:** Identify and resolve bottlenecks, reducing latency in your applications.
- **Troubleshoot errors:** Quickly pinpoint the source of errors or unexpected behavior in your distributed system.
- **Allocate resources:** Optimize resource allocation by understanding usage patterns of different services.
- **Visualize service dependencies:** Visualize dependencies between services, helping you to manage architectures. 

## Distributed tracing pipeline

OpenSearch provides a distributed tracing pipeline that can be used to ingest, process, and visualize tracing data with query and alerting functionality. [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) is an open-source observability framework that provides a set of APIs, libraries, agents, and collectors for generating, capturing, and exporting telemetry data. The distributed tracing pipeline consists of the following components: 

> - **Instrumentation:** Instrumenting your application code with OpenTelemetry SDKs.

Reviewer 4: Should this and the preceding list match in format (We use the -ing in this list but not in the preceding one).

Author: Yes, good catch. Change made to preceding list to use -ing.

- **Propagation:** Injecting trace context into requests as they propagate through your system.
- **Collection:** Collecting trace data from your application.
- **Processing:** Aggregating trace data from multiple sources and enriching it with additional metadata.
- **Exporting:** Sending trace data to a backend for storage and analysis. 

OpenSearch is often chosen as the sink for storing trace data.

## Trace analytics

> OpenSearch provides a `trace-analytics` plugin for visualizing trace data in real time. The plugin includes pre-built dashboards for analyzing trace data, such as service maps, latency histograms, and error rates. With OpenSearch's distributed tracing pipeline, you can quickly identify bottlenecks and errors in your applications. See the [Trace analytics]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/trace/index/) documentation for more information. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
OpenSearch provides a `trace-analytics` plugin for visualizing trace data in real time. The plugin includes prebuilt dashboards for analyzing trace data, such as service maps, latency histograms, and error rates. With OpenSearch's distributed tracing pipeline, you can quickly identify bottlenecks and errors in your applications. See the [Trace analytics]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/trace/index/) documentation for more information. 
```

## Get started

> The distributed tracing feature is experimental as of OpenSearch 2.10. To begin using the distributed tracing feature, you need to first enable it using `opensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled` feature flag, and subsequently activate the tracer, using the dynamic setting `telemetry.tracer.enabled`. It's important to exercise caution when enabling this feature, as it can consume system resources. Detailed information on enabling and configuring distributed tracing, including on-demand troubleshooting and request sampling, is described in the following sections.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The distributed tracing feature is experimental as of OpenSearch 2.10. To begin using the distributed tracing feature, you need to first enable it using the `opensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled` feature flag and subsequently activate the tracer, using the dynamic setting `telemetry.tracer.enabled`. It's important to exercise caution when enabling this feature because it can consume system resources. Detailed information on enabling and configuring distributed tracing, including on-demand troubleshooting and request sampling, is described in the following sections.
```

> The distributed tracing feature is experimental as of OpenSearch 2.10. To begin using the distributed tracing feature, you need to first enable it using `opensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled` feature flag, and subsequently activate the tracer, using the dynamic setting `telemetry.tracer.enabled`. It's important to exercise caution when enabling this feature, as it can consume system resources. Detailed information on enabling and configuring distributed tracing, including on-demand troubleshooting and request sampling, is described in the following sections.

Reviewer 4: Second sentence: "...and subsequently activate the tracer by using..."?

> ### Enable on a node using a tarball install

Reviewer 4: Should this be "Enabling a [noun] on a node using a tarball installation"?

Author: Revised

Author: Revised: Enabling the flag on a node using tarball

The flag is toggled using a new Java Virtual Machine (JVM) parameter that is set either in `OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS` or in `config/jvm.options`.

#### Option 1: Enable the experimental feature flag in the `opensearch.yml` file

> 1. Change to the top directory of your OpenSearch installation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. Change to the top directory of your OpenSearch installation:
```

> 1. Change to the top directory of your OpenSearch installation.

Reviewer 4: Is "Change" the right word, or do we mean "Navigate"?

```bash
cd \path\to\opensearch
```

> 2. Open your OpenSearch configuration folder, then open the `opensearch.yml` file with a text editor.

Reviewer 4: Should there be an empty line between 2 and 3?

> 2. Open your OpenSearch configuration folder, then open the `opensearch.yml` file with a text editor.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Open your OpenSearch configuration folder, and then open the `opensearch.yml` file with a text editor.
```

3. Add the following line:

```bash
opensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true
```
{% include copy.html %}

4. Save your changes and close the file.

#### Option 2: Modify jvm.options

Add the following lines to `config/jvm.options` before starting the OpenSearch process to enable the feature and its dependency:

```bash
-Dopensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true
```
{% include copy.html %}

> Run OpenSearch

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Run OpenSearch:
```

```bash
./bin/opensearch
```
{% include copy.html %}

#### Option 3: Enable from an environment variable

> As an alternative to directly modifying `config/jvm.options`, you can define the properties by using an environment variable. This can be done in a single command when you start OpenSearch or by defining the variable with export.

Reviewer 4: Are there words missing at the end of this sentence? It seems like an abrupt stop.

Author: Revised

To add these flags inline when starting OpenSearch, run the following command:

```bash
OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS="-Dopensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true" ./opensearch-2.9.0/bin/opensearch
```
{% include copy.html %}

To define the environment variable separately, prior to running OpenSearch, run the following command:

```bash
export OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS="-Dopensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true"
 ./bin/opensearch
```
{% include copy.html %}

### Enable with Docker containers

> If you’re running Docker, add the following line to `docker-compose.yml` under the `opensearch-node` and environment section:

Author: Revised

```bash
OPENSEARCH_JAVA_OPTS="-Dopensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled=true"
```
{% include copy.html %}

### Enable for OpenSearch development

To enable the distributed tracing feature, you must first add the correct properties to `run.gradle` before building OpenSearch. See the [Developer Guide](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/main/DEVELOPER_GUIDE.md#gradle-build) for information about to use how Gradle to build OpenSearch.

Add the following properties to `run.gradle` to enable the feature:

```json
testClusters {
  runTask {
    testDistribution = 'archive'
 if (numZones > 1) numberOfZones = numZones
    if (numNodes > 1) numberOfNodes = numNodes
    systemProperty 'opensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled', 'true'
    }
 }
 ```
 {% include copy.html %}

### Enable distributed tracing

> Once you've enabled the feature flag, you can enable the tracer (which is disabled by default) using the following dynamic setting that enables tracing in the running cluster:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Once you've enabled the feature flag, you can enable the tracer (which is disabled by default) by using the following dynamic setting that enables tracing in the running cluster:
```

2. **Exporters:** Exporters are responsible for persisting the data. OpenTelemetry provides several out-of-the-box exporters, and OpenSearch supports the following:
    - `LoggingSpanExporter`: Exports spans to a log file, generating a separate file in the logs directory `_otel_traces.log`. Default is `telemetry.otel.tracer.span.exporter.class=io.opentelemetry.exporter.logging.LoggingSpanExporter`.
    - `OtlpGrpcSpanExporter`: Exports spans through gRPC. To use this exporter, you need to install the `otel-collector` on the node. By default, it writes to the http://localhost:4317/ endpoint. To use this exporter, set the following static setting: `telemetry.otel.tracer.span.exporter.class=org.opensearch.telemetry.tracing.exporter.OtlpGrpcSpanExporterProvider`.
    - `LoggingSpanExporter`: Exports spans to a log file, generating a separate file in the logs directory `_otel_traces.log`. Default is `telemetry.otel.tracer.span.exporter.class=io.opentelemetry.exporter.logging.LoggingSpanExporter`.

### Sampling

> Distributed tracing can generate numerous spans, consuming system resources unnecessarily. To reduce the number of traces, also called samples, you can configure different sampling thresholds. By default, sampling is configured to include only 1% of all HTTP requests. Sampling has the following types:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Distributed tracing can generate numerous spans, consuming system resources unnecessarily. To reduce the number of traces, also called _samples_, you can configure different sampling thresholds. By default, sampling is configured to include only 1% of all HTTP requests. Sampling has the following types:
```

> Distributed tracing can generate numerous spans, consuming system resources unnecessarily. To reduce the number of traces, also called samples, you can configure different sampling thresholds. By default, sampling is configured to include only 1% of all HTTP requests. Sampling has the following types:

Reviewer 4: "Sampling includes" instead of "Sampling has"?

1. **Head sampling:** Sampling decisions are made before initiating the root span of a request. OpenSearch supports two head sampling methods:
    - **Probabilistic:** A blanket limit on incoming requests, dynamically adjustable with the `telemetry.tracer.sampler.probability` setting. This setting ranges between 0 and 1. Default is 0.01, which indicates that 1% of incoming requests are sampled.
    - **On-Demand:** For debugging specific requests, you can send the `trace=true` attribute as part of the HTTP headers, causing those requests to be sampled regardless of the probabilistic sampling setting.

> 2. **Tail sampling:** To configure tail sampling, follow the [OpenTelemetry tail sampling documentation](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/sampling/#tail-sampling). Configuration depends on the type of collector you choose. Updates on ongoing work for OpenSearch are in the [RFC](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/8918) on GitHub.

Reviewer 4: "follow the instructions in"? Can we delete the last sentence as unnecessary?

Author: Revised. Yes, deleted.

### Collection of spans

> The `SpanProcessor` writes spans to the exporter, and the choice of exporter defines the endpoint, which can be logs or gRPC. To collect spans by using gRPC, you need to configure the collector as a sidecar process running on each OpenSearch node. From the collectors, these spans can be written to the sink of your choice, such as Jaeger, Prometheus, Grafana, and FileStore, for further analysis.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `SpanProcessor` writes spans to the exporter, and the choice of exporter defines the endpoint, which can be logs or gRPC. To collect spans by using gRPC, you need to configure the collector as a sidecar process running on each OpenSearch node. From the collectors, these spans can be written to the sink of your choice, such as Jaeger, Prometheus, Grafana, or FileStore, for further analysis.
```
